---
title: 4.1 Antiderivatives
---

- Write the general solution of a differential equation and use indefinite integral notation for antiderivatives.
- Use basic integration rules to find antiderivatives.
- Find a particular solution to a differential equation.

#### Assignment

- **Vocabulary** and **teal boxes**{: .teal-box}
- p287 2, 3, 9–11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 35, 38, 39, 42, 44, 48, 52, 53, 57, 65, 67, 74–77
- p272 3–5, 9, 11, 14, 16–19, 25–28, 35 *40, 52–55*{: .ap-problems}

#### Additional Resources

- AP Topics: 4.6
- Khan Academy
  - [Approximating values of a function using local linearity and linearization](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/ap-calculus-ab/ab-diff-contextual-applications-new/ab-4-6/v/local-linearization-intro)

---

> A function $F$ is an antiderivative of $f$ on an interval $I$ when $F'(x) = f(x)$ for all $x$ in $I$.

Something that's not mentioned much is that there is not really any notation to identify the antiderivative of a function, at least not like you are used to with derivatives. If you have a function $f(x)$, then its derivative is $f'(x)$ or $\frac{df}{dx}$. For the antiderivative, one of the common ways to note it is with it's uppercase version. So, the antiderivative of $f(x)$ is $F(x)$, which is basically what the definition above is stating.

Theorem 4.1 takes the definition of antiderivative one step further. If $f(x)=2$, then $F(x) = 2x$ or $2x + 1$ or $2x + 7$ or $2x - \pi$. When you find the antiderivative of a function, you need to keep in mind that there is actually an infinite number of antiderivatives because there could be any constant tacked on to the end. This is noted by a $+C$ at the end of the antiderivative.

## Solving a Differential Equation and the Integral Sign

The first example has you solve the differential equation $dy/dx = 2$, where a differential equation is any equation that involves derivatives. For now, solving differential equations involves finding the antiderivative. So in this case, our solution is $y = 2x + C$.

The notation you'll see going forward uses the integral sign. The $dx$ simply notes which variable is the target of our antidifferentiation.

$$ y = \int f(x) dx = Fx + C $$

For solving $dy/dx = 2$, we would do

$$ y = \int 2 dx = Fx + C $$
