## Frequency Distributions and Their Graphs

### Frequency Distributions

Picking up on patterns when data has many different entries can be tricky. If you were to list the GPA of every student in the senior, it would be a very long list and have little repetition.

So one way to present this data so we can make some sense of it is to group them together into **classes** (also called intervals) and list how many entries are in that class.  Here's the GPA frequency distribution.

| Class   | Frequency, $f$ |
| ------- | :------------: |
| 1.6–2.0 |       8        |
| 2.1–2.5 |       20       |
| 2.6–3.0 |       26       |
| 3.1–3.5 |       36       |
| 3.6–4.0 |       33       |
| >4.0    |       5        |

A **frequency distribution** is a table that shows classes of data entries with a count of the number of entries in each class. The **frequency $f$** of a class is the number of data entries in the class.

Here's the steps too building a frequency distribution.

#### Constructing a Frequency Distribution from a Data Set

1.
    Decide on the number of classes to include in the frequency distribution. The number of classes should be between 5 and 20; otherwise, it may be difficult to detect any patterns.
2.
    Determine the class width. Determine the **range** of the data by finding the difference between the maximum and minimum entries. Then divide the range by the number of classes and _round up to the next convenient number_.
3.
    Find the class limits. You can use the minimum data entry as the lower limit of the first class. To find the remaining lower limits, add the class width to the lower limit of the preceding class. Then find the upper limit of the first class. Remember that classes cannot overlap. Find the remaining upper class limits.
4.
    Make a tally mark for each data entry in the row of the appropriate class.
5.
    Count the tally marks to find the total frequency $f$ for each class.
