## 2.3 Measures of Central Tendency

### Mean, Median and Mode

**Mean** is the sum of the data entries divided by the number of
entries. In statistics, variables are used to repesent the mean, but different ones are used depending on if we are using a population or sample.

$$ \text{Population: }\mu = \frac{\Sigma x}{N} \qquad \text{Sample: }\bar{x} = \frac{\Sigma x}{n} $$

For population, the Greek letter μ ("mu)" and _N_ are used, but when it's a sample we use $\bar{x}$ ("_x_ bar") and _n_. This is done to make it clear that we are either taking about a parameter, a fact about a population, or a statistic, something taken from the sample.

In both cases, the Green letter Σ ("sigma") represents "sum of", that we are adding up all the data entries.

> **A quick note about the word "average"**. Words are jazz and people tend to do whatever they want with them in casual speech. The word "average" is a casualty of this. An average is any single number or value that best represents a set of data. Most people have gone on to assume that average means taking the sum of everything and dividing by the number of items, but median or mode could be a better representation.

The **median** of a set of data is the middle number when they are arranged in order. If you have an odd number of entries, this is straightforward.

$$ 3 \quad 4 \quad 5 $$

But when you have an even number of items

$$ 3 \quad 4 \quad 5 \quad 6$$

you need to find the midpoint of the two middle numbers (or their mean). So, for the first set, the median is 4 and the second set has a median of 4.5.

Our final one is **mode**, which is just the data entry that appears most often. Depending on the case, a frequency class could be looked at rather than a single value.

Data can have no mode, but it's also possible for their to be two modes (**bimodal**) or more (**multimodal**).

### Weighted Mean and Mean of Grouped Data