## P.3 Functions and Their Graphs

### Functions and Function Notation
A relation between two sets, typically $X$ and $Y$, is a set of ordered pairs. A function is a special type of relation where every $x$-value in $X$ matches to exactly one $y$-value in $Y$. Different $x$-values can map to the same $y$-value, but each $x$-value can only be paired with one $y$-value.

In this case, the $x$ variable is your independent variable and $y$ your dependent, but different situations will see that change. The area of a circle is a function of its radius $(A=\pi r^2)$, so $A$ is the dependent variable that is determined by the independent one, $r$.

You'll see the words 'implicit' and 'explicit' throughout the course when talking about functions. Explicit functions are what you are used to seeing. They are the ones that are evaluated for $y$.

$$ y = \frac{1}{2}\left(1-x^2\right) $$

And you can take that and use function notation to rewrite it.

$$ f(x) = \frac{1}{2}\left(1-x^2\right) $$

This is handy since it's clear that $x$ is the independent variable, with $f$ being the function. Just keep in mind that $f(x)$ is just the popular name used. You will run to others, like our area function from before.

$$ A(r) = \pi r^2 $$

Implicit functions are when the function is not evaluated for the dependent variable.

$$ x^2 + 2y = 1 $$

#### Evaluating functions

When evaluating functions, you only need to substitute what's in the independent variable.

$$ \begin{align*}
f(x)  &= x^2 + 7 \\
f(3a) &= (3a)^2 + 7 \\
      &= 9a^2 + 7
\end{align*}$$

### The Domain and Range of the Function

