## Arithmetic Sequences and Series

An **arithmetic sequence** is a series of numbers where the difference between successive numbers is constant throughout. The difference itself is known as the **common difference**.

$$ 1, 2, 3, 4, \dots$$
$$ 3, 8, 13, 18, \dots $$
$$ 17, 14, 11, 8, \dots $$

Arithmetic sequences can also be thought of as functions, where the domain would be the term number in the sequence, and the range the actual number itself.

| $n$ | $a_n$ |
|-----|--------|
| 1   | 3      |
| 2   | 8      |
| 3   | 13     |
| 4   | 18     |

The variable $a$ with a subscript number is typically used to tell you which term is being referenced. So, in the sequence above, when $n=2$ then $a_2=8$.

### Defining the Function

One way to define an arithmetic sequence is with point-slope form, which produces an explicit definition. The output is clearly defined in terms of the input, like all other functions you've dealt with so far.

The sequence's common difference, $d$, is actually the slope of the function, which gives us

$$ y - a_n = d(x - n) $$

And since you typically know the first term, you will see this more specific definition.

$$ a_n - a_1 = d(n - 1) \quad \rightarrow \quad a_n = d(n - 1) + a_1$$

Just keep in mind that it doesn't have to be the first term in the sequence. If you happen to only know some other term, just swap in what you need. For example, if the third term in the sequence is 7 and the common difference is 4, then

$$ a_n - 7 = 4(n - 3) $$

#### Recursive Definition

There is also a recursive definition, meaning it is defined by the previous term in the sequence. The definition itself is made up of a base case, or starting point, and then defines the next term in the sequence.

$$ a_n = \begin{cases}
    a_1         & n=1 \\
    a_{n-1} + d & n > 1
\end{cases} $$

Here's the sequence above, where the first term is 3 and the common difference is 5.

$$ a_n = \begin{cases}
    3         & n=1 \\
    a_{n-1} + 5 & n > 1
\end{cases} $$

### Finding the Common Difference

Given two terms, you can find the common difference if you keep in mind that arithmetic sequences are just functions. If you are given $a_1=18$ and $a_5=26$, you technically know two points: $(1,18)$ and $(5,26)$. Use your definition of slope to find that the common difference is $8/4 = 2$.

### Summing an Arithmetic Sequence

What if the sequence is finite and you need to sum up all the terms? If the number of terms is small, you can brute force it and just add them up manually. But if it's a large number of terms, there is a quicker way.

Let's say we have an arithmetic series, $S$, and we want to add up the first five terms in it, in this case they are 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17. Because of the nature of arithmetic sequences, terms match up to produce the same sum. First goes with last, second goes with second to last, and so on. In this case, each pair adds up 19. We'll take advantage of that fact to produce our equation.

$$\begin{align}
S_5  &= 2 + 5 + 8 + 11 + 14 + 17 \\
2S_5 &= 19+19 +19 + 19 + 19 + 19 && \color{red}\text{Sequence added to itself} \\
2S_5 &= 6(19) \\
S_5  &= \frac{6(2 + 17)}{2}      && \color{red}\text{Split the 19 into first and last terms} \\
S_5  &= 57
\end{align}$$

Line 4 is the key here. Using just the number of terms, 6, and the first and last terms, 2 and 17, we can find the sum of an arithmetic sequence.

$$ S_n = \frac{n(a_1 + a_n)}{2}  $$

