---
title: 3.1 Graphing Polynomial Functions
---

## {{ page.title }}

Predict the behavior of polynomial functions.

✎ p137 13–17, 19–32

---

Polynomials are expressions that involve addition, subtraction, multiplication and exponentiation to nonnegative integer powers. You've seen polynomials already with linear and quadratic functions, but this chapter will look at polynomials in general, rather than specific ones.

### Classifying Polynomials

First thing is to lay the ground work for how we describe polynomials. First up is the **standard form of a polynomial**, which is when the polynomial is written so that each **term** is in descending order of **degree**, or exponent. Terms are what is being added (or subtracted).

$$ -4x + 9 + 2x^3 \quad \rightarrow \quad 2x^3 - 4x + 9 $$

The polygonal above has three terms and was rearranged so that the term with the highest degree was first, followed by the second highest, and so on.

Speaking of terms, the words **monomial**, **binomial**, and **trinomial** are used often and refer to polynomials with 1, 2, or 3 terms respectively.

The **degree of a polynomial** is just the greatest degree in the polynomial. In the one above, the degree of the polynomial is 3. There are also names for each degree, so while you will hear "degree 3 polynomial", you'll also hear it called a "cubic".

| Degree | Name      | Example      |
| ------ | --------- | ------------ |
| 0      | Constant  | $4$          |
| 1      | Linear    | $2x+3$       |
| 2      | Quadratic | $3x^2+x-9$   |
| 3      | Cubic     | $x^3-6x^2+3$ |
| 4      | Quartic   | $5x^4-2x+4$  |

Note that you don't need a term for each successive degree term. The polynomial $2x^2$ is just as much a quadratic as $2x^2 + 5x -4$.


The last bit of language to cover is the **leading term** and **leading coefficient**. The leading term of a polynomial is the term with the highest degree. Coefficients are the numerical factors of a term, like the 3 in $3x$. The leading coefficient, it follows, is the one in the leading term. $6x^5 - 5$ has a leading term of $6x^5$ with a leading coefficient of 6.

### End Behavior of a Polynomial

It's helpful to get a feel for what the graphs of polynomials look like, without having the graph them. For now, we'll focus on the extreme ends of them and leave the middle for another time.

Picturing the ends of a polynomial can be done by plugging in ridiculously large numbers into the function. Stupid big. A one followed by thousands of zeros big. The idea is not to evaluate it, but to see if the polynomial is positive or negative.

Let's look at $2x^6-6x^5-7$ and plug in one billion (yes, smaller than what I suggested, but easier to write). So, take one billion, raise it to the sixth power and multiply it by 2. You get a ridiculously large *positive* number. And when you try it with negative one billion, you get the same result: a positive number.

Now, take a billion and raise it to the fifth power and multiply it by 6. Even though we are subtracting it, there's no way that number will have any impact on what we got from our leading term. And this is why there was an emphasis earlier on the leading term and coefficient. That term dictates the end behavior of the polynomials because it overpowers every other term.

There is a pattern to this you can pick up by l