---
title: 3.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions
---

Model and solve problems using the zeros of a polynomial function.

#### Assignment

- All vocabulary copied into notes
- p168 6–12, 15–30

---

## Using Zeros to Graph Functions

After you've found the zeros of a polynomial, you can next determine what the function is doing in between those zeros. The polynomial $f(x)=x(x-4)(x+3)$ is already factored, so we can see its zeros are $0$, $4$, and $-3$. This means you have four intervals. Substituting a value from each interval and then checking the resulting sign will tell you if that portion of the graph is above or below the $x$-axis.

For the polynomial above, the values $1$, $-1$, a million and negative a million work well for quickly arriving at what sign is produced.

## Multiplicity of Zeros

Sometimes a zero occurs multiple times, like in the case of $f(x)=(x-1)(x+2)^2$. Written without the exponent we would have $f(x) = (x-1)(x+2)(x+2)$, so our zeros are $1$, $-2$, and $-2$ again.

Graphically, this has impact as a zero with an even multiplicity will *not* cross the $x$-axis. It instead will "bounce" off of it and not change signs. You can use this to your advantage when sketching a graph. If you know one interval, you automatically know the rest without the need for testing.

The graph of $f(x)=(x+2)^2(x-1)^3$ has two zeros at $-2$ and $1$, meaning three intervals. I'll plug in a massively large positive number to determine the sign there and get a positive. Working to the left, our first zero is $1$ which has an odd multiplicity, so the next interval must be the opposite, so negative. The next zero has an even multiplicity, the sign stays the same, so negative again. That means, in left-to-right increasing order, our intervals are negative, negative, positive, and [the graph confirms that](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/pjfl1kr7as).

## Finding all the Zeros

Assuming no calculator, your first step would be to factor as much as possible. If you are also given a graph, divide by that zero to confirm it actually is a zero, and then work with what remains. Remember that the [Remainder Theorem](http://127.0.0.1:4000/textbook-notes/envision-algebra-2/3-polynomial-functions/3.4-dividing-polynomials.html#the-remainder-theorem) lets you skip substitution and just divide to evaluate a polynomial for a certain value.

