## 1.3 Data Collection and Experimental Design

### Design of a Statistical Study
Any conclusion based on a statistical study is only as good as the process used to design the study. You'll need to be familiar with how to design a statistical study so you can judge whether its results should be trusted.

> #### Designing a Statistical Study
> 1. Identify the variables of interest (or the focus) and the population of the study.
> 2. Develop a detailed plan for collecting data. If you use a sample, make sure the sample is representative of the population.
> 3. Collect the data.
> 4. Describe the data, using descriptive statistics techniques.
> 5. Interpret the data and make decisions about the population using inferential statistics.
> 6. Identify any possible errors.

Statistical studies are typically either an observational or an experiment.

> In an **observational study**, a researcher does not influence the responses.
>
> In an **experiment**, a researcher deliberately applies a treatment before observing the responses.

Observational studies are pretty straightforward. The researchers do their absolute best to not interfer with the study, for fear of contaminating the results.

Experiments since experiments involve interaction with the subjects, there are two groups set up: a treatment group and a control group. The treatment group receives whatever is being studied, say a drug, while the control group does not. The responses from both groups are then recorded and studied.

Sometimes, to deal with the human element, placebos are given to the control group. The reasons for this are psychological, so we won't get into it here.

### Data Collection
