---
title: 4.4 Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions
---

- Understand that rational expressions form a system analogous to the system of rational numbers and use that understanding to add and subtract rational expressions.

#### Assignment

- All vocabulary copied into notes
- p222 12–17, 20–35
  - Answers to [odd questions]({{site.baseurl}}/misc/alg2-odd-answers.pdf) / [even questions]({{site.baseurl}}/misc/alg2-even-answers.pdf)

---

Like the last section, there isn't a whole lot of new concepts to learn. We are adding and subtracting what are essentially fractions, so we'll review how to go about that as painlessly as possible.

## The LCM of Polynomials

The least common multiple of two numbers involved each numbers prime factors. In fact, the LCM is the product of multiplying the highest power of each prime number together. To find the LCM of 12 and 18 we need prime factorization of each.

$$\begin{align}
12 &=2^2 \cdot 3^1\\
18 &= 2^1 \cdot 3^2 \\[1em]
\text{lcm}(12,18) &= 2^2 \cdot 3^2 \\
                  &= 36
\end{align}$$

The LCM of polynomials is similar, except your prime factors are just the result of the factoring you have been doing since the beginning. Let's find the LCM of $x^2+4x+4$ and $x^2+5x+6$.

$$\begin{align}
x^2+4x+4 &= (x+2)^2\\
x^2+5x+6 &= (x+2)(x+3) \\[1em]
\text{LCM: }& (x+2)^2(x+3)
\end{align}$$

Now we can go about adding rational expressions with unlike denominators.

## Adding Rational Expressions With Unlike Denominators

The LCM will help us identify what is missing from each denominator. Once we determine what additional factors are needed to hit the LCM, we'll multiply each fraction by what it needs.

$$\begin{align}
\frac{x+3}{x^2-1} + \frac{2}{x^2-3x+2} &= \frac{x+3}{(x-1)(x+1)} + \frac{2}{(x-2)(x-1)} \\[1em]
&= \frac{x+3}{(x-1)(x+1)} \cdot {\color{red}\frac{x-2}{x-2}} +
   \frac{2}{(x-2)(x-1)} \cdot {\color{red}\frac{x+1}{x+1}} \\[1em]
\end{align}$$

From here, I recommend leaving your denominator factored and only simplify your numerator. Then you can refactor and divide out what you can.

$$\begin{align}
\frac{x+3}{(x-1)(x+1)} \cdot {\frac{x-2}{x-2}} +
   \frac{2}{(x-2)(x-1)} \cdot {\frac{x+1}{x+1}}
   &= \frac{(x^2+x-6)+(2x+2))}{(x-1)(x+1)(x-2)} \\[1em]
   &= \frac{x^2+3x-4}{(x-1)(x+1)(x-2)} \\[1em]
   &= \frac{(x+4)(x-1)}{(x-1)(x+1)(x-2)} \\[1em]
   &= \frac{x+4}{(x+1)(x-2)}
\end{align}$$

Keep in mind your original domain from the start of the problem. Despite appearances, $x\neq\\{2,\pm1\\}$.
