---
title: 4.5 Solving Rational Equations
---

{: .lesson-dates}
Lesson: February 10, 2025. Quiz: February 13, 2025.

- Solve rational equations in one variable. Identify extraneous solutions to rational equations and give examples of how they arise.

#### Assignment

- All vocabulary copied into notes
- p230 8–14, 16–33
  - Answers to [odd questions]({{site.baseurl}}/misc/alg2-odd-answers.pdf) / [even questions]({{site.baseurl}}/misc/alg2-even-answers.pdf)

---

## Solving a Rational Equation

The general strategy is to eliminate your denominators so that you are back in polynomial territory.

$$\begin{align}
\frac{1}{x+4} &= 2 \\[1em]
            1 &= 2(x+4) \\
            0 &= 2x + 7 \\
            x &= -\frac{7}{2}
\end{align}$$

The catch is that you have to watch out for **extraneous solutions**. Your original equation will have restrictions on the domain, so any solution that falls outside the domain is not actually a solution, despite appearances.

$$\begin{align}
\frac{1}{x-5} + \frac{x}{x-3} &= \frac{2}{x^2-8x+15} \\[1em]
\frac{(x-3)+(x^2-5x)}{(x-5)(x-3)} &= \frac{2}{(x-5)(x-3)} \\[1em]
x^2 - 4x - 3 &= 2 \\
x^2 - 4x - 5 &= 0
(x-5)(x+1) &= 0 \\
x &=\{-1,5\}
\end{align}$$

Based on the original domain, $x\neq5$ since it's an extraneous solution and we are left only with $x=-1$.

Here's another example from the book (4B on page 227), but worked out a different way. Pay careful attention to what happens from $(12)$ to $(13)$.

$$\begin{align}
\frac{3}{x-3} &= \frac{x}{x-3} - \frac{x}{4} \\[1em]
\frac{3}{x-3} - \frac{x}{x-3} &= - \frac{x}{4} \\[1em]
\frac{3 - x}{x-3} &= -\frac{x}{4} \\[1em]
-\frac{x-3}{x-3} &= -\frac{x}{4} \\[1em]
-1 &= -\frac{x}{4} \\[1em]
x&=4
\end{align}$$

The way that problem was worked out above didn't lead to any extraneous solutions, but will if you don't move your expressions with like denominators to the same side.
